So let's start right away with stuff that we will need to see before we can go on to more advanced things.
So, hopefully yesterday in recitation, you heard a bit about vectors. How many of you actually knew about vectors
before that? OK, that's the vast majority.
If you are not one of those people, well, hopefully you'll learn about vectors right now.
I'm sorry that the learning curve will be a bit steeper for the first week. But hopefully, you'll adjust fine. If you have
trouble with vectors, do go to your recitation instructor's office hours for extra practice if you feel the need to.
You will see it's pretty easy. So, just to remind you, a vector is a quantity that has both a direction and a
magnitude of length.
So -- So, concretely the way you draw a vector is by some arrow, like that, OK?
And so, it has a length, and it's pointing in some direction. And, so, now, the way that we compute things with
vectors, typically, as we introduce a coordinate system.
So, if we are in the plane, x-y-axis, if we are in space, x-y-z axis. So, usually I will try to draw my x-y-z axis
consistently to look like this.
And then, I can represent my vector in terms of its components along the coordinate axis.
So, that means when I have this row, I can ask, how much does it go in the x direction?
How much does it go in the y direction?
How much does it go in the z direction?
And, so, let's call this a vector A.
So, it's more convention. When we have a vector quantity, we put an arrow on top to remind us that it's a vector.
If it's in the textbook, then sometimes it's in bold because it's easier to typeset. If you've tried in your favorite word
processor, bold is easy and vectors are not easy. So, the vector you can try to decompose terms of unit vectors
directed along the coordinate axis. So, the convention is there is a vector that we call ***amp***lt;i***amp***gt; hat
that points along the x axis and has length one.
There's a vector called ***amp***lt;j***amp***gt; hat that does the same along the y axis, and the
***amp***lt;k***amp***gt; hat that does the same along the z axis.
And, so, we can express any vector in terms of its components. So, the other notation is ***amp***lt;a1, a2, a3
***amp***gt; between these square brackets. Well, in angular brackets.
So, the length of a vector we denote by, if you want, it's the same notation as the absolute value.
So, that's going to be a number, as we say, now, a scalar quantity. OK, so, a scalar quantity is a usual numerical
quantity as opposed to a vector quantity.
And, its direction is sometimes called dir A, and that can be obtained just by scaling the vector down to unit length,
for example, by dividing it by its length. So -- Well, there's a lot of notation to be learned. So, for example, if I have
two points, P and Q, then I can draw a vector from P to Q. And, that vector is called vector PQ, OK? So, maybe
we'll call it A.
But, a vector doesn't really have, necessarily, a starting point and an ending point.
OK, so if I decide to start here and I go by the same distance in the same direction, this is also vector A.
It's the same thing. So, a lot of vectors we'll draw starting at the origin, but we don't have to.
So, let's just check and see how things went in recitation.
So, let's say that I give you the vector ***amp***lt;3,2,1***amp***gt;. And so, what do you think about the length of
this vector? OK, I see an answer forming.
So, a lot of you are answering the same thing.
Maybe it shouldn't spoil it for those who haven't given it yet.
OK, I think the overwhelming vote is in favor of answer number two. I see some sixes, I don't know.
That's a perfectly good answer, too, but hopefully in a few minutes it won't be I don't know anymore.
So, let's see. How do we find -- -- the length of a vector three, two, one?
Well, so, this vector, A, it comes towards us along the x axis by three units. It goes to the right along the y axis by
two units, and then it goes up by one unit along the z axis. OK, so, it's pointing towards here. That's pretty hard to
draw.
So, how do we get its length? Well, maybe we can start with something easier, the length of the vector in the
plane. So, observe that A is obtained from a vector, B, in the plane.
Say, B equals three (i) hat plus two (j) hat.
And then, we just have to, still, go up by one unit, OK? So, let me try to draw a picture in this vertical plane that
contains A and B.
If I draw it in the vertical plane, so, that's the Z axis, that's not any particular axis, then my vector B will go here,
and my vector A will go above it. And here, that's one unit.
And, here I have a right angle. So, I can use the Pythagorean theorem to find that length A^2 equals length B^2
plus one.
Now, we are reduced to finding the length of B.
The length of B, we can again find using the Pythagorean theorem in the XY plane because here we have the
right angle. Here we have three units, and here we have two units. OK, so, if you do the calculations, you will see
that, well, length of B is square root of (3^2 2^2), that's 13. So, the square root of 13 -- -- and length of A is square
root of length B^2 plus one (square it if you want) which is going to be square root of 13 plus one is the square
root of 14, hence, answer number two which almost all of you gave. OK, so the general formula, if you follow it
with it, in general if we have a vector with components a1, a2, a3, then the length of A is the square root of a1^2
plus a2^2 plus a3^2. OK, any questions about that?
Yes? Yes.
So, in general, we indeed can consider vectors in abstract spaces that have any number of coordinates.
And that you have more components.
In this class, we'll mostly see vectors with two or three components because they are easier to draw, and because
a lot of the math that we'll see works exactly the same way whether you have three variables or a million
variables. If we had a factor with more components, then we would have a lot of trouble drawing it.
But we could still define its length in the same way, by summing the squares of the components.
So, I'm sorry to say that here, multi-variable, multi will mean mostly two or three.
But, be assured that it works just the same way if you have 10,000 variables. Just, calculations are longer.
OK, more questions? So, what else can we do with vectors? Well, another thing that I'm sure you know how to do
with vectors is to add them to scale them. So, vector addition, so, if you have two vectors, A and B, then you can
form, their sum, A plus B. How do we do that?
Well, first, I should tell you, vectors, they have this double life.
They are, at the same time, geometric objects that we can draw like this in pictures, and there are also
computational objects that we can represent by numbers.
So, every question about vectors will have two answers, one geometric, and one numerical.
OK, so let's start with the geometric.
So, let's say that I have two vectors, A and B, given to me. And, let's say that I thought of drawing them at the
same place to start with.
Well, to take the sum, what I should do is actually move B so that it starts at the end of A, at the head of A.
OK, so this is, again, vector B. So, observe, this actually forms, now, a parallelogram, right? So, this side is, again,
vector A. And now, if we take the diagonal of that parallelogram, this is what we call A plus B, OK, so, the idea
being that to move along A plus B, it's the same as to move first along A and then along B, or, along B, then along
A. A plus B equals B plus A.
OK, now, if we do it numerically, then all you do is you just add the first component of A with the first component of
B, the second with the second, and the third with the third. OK, say that A was ***amp***lt;a1, a2, a3***amp***gt; B
was ***amp***lt;b1, b2, b3***amp***gt;, then you just add this way. OK, so it's pretty straightforward. So, for
example, I said that my vector over there, its components are three, two, one. But, I also wrote it as 3i 2j k.
What does that mean? OK, so I need to tell you first about multiplying by a scalar. So, this is about addition.
So, multiplication by a scalar, it's very easy.
If you have a vector, A, then you can form a vector 2A just by making it go twice as far in the same direction.
Or, we can make half A more modestly.
We can even make minus A, and so on.
So now, you see, if I do the calculation, 3i 2j k, well, what does it mean?
3i is just going to go along the x axis, but by distance of three instead of one. And then, 2j goes two units along the
3i is just going to go along the x axis, but by distance of three instead of one. And then, 2j goes two units along the
y axis, and k goes up by one unit.
Well, if you add these together, you will go from the origin, then along the x axis, then parallel to the y axis, and
then up. And, you will end up, indeed, at the endpoint of a vector.
OK, any questions at this point? Yes?
Exactly. To add vectors geometrically, you just put the head of the first vector and the tail of the second vector in
the same place. And then, it's head to tail addition. Any other questions?
Yes? That's correct.
If you subtract two vectors, that just means you add the opposite of a vector. So, for example, if I wanted to do A
minus B, I would first go along A and then along minus B, which would take me somewhere over there, OK? So, A
minus B, if you want, would go from here to here.
OK, so hopefully you've kind of seen that stuff either before in your lives, or at least yesterday.
So, I'm going to use that as an excuse to move quickly forward.
So, now we are going to learn a few more operations about vectors. And, these operations will be useful to us
when we start trying to do a bit of geometry.
So, of course, you've all done some geometry.
But, we are going to see that geometry can be done using vectors. And, in many ways, it's the right language for
that, and in particular when we learn about functions we really will want to use vectors more than, maybe, the
other kind of geometry that you've seen before.
I mean, of course, it's just a language in a way.
I mean, we are just reformulating things that you have seen, you already know since childhood.
But, you will see that notation somehow helps to make it more straightforward. So, what is dot product?
Well, dot product as a way of multiplying two vectors to get a number, a scalar. And, well, let me start by giving
you a definition in terms of components.
What we do, let's say that we have a vector, A, with components a1, a2, a3, vector B with components b1, b2, b3.
Well, we multiply the first components by the first components, the second by the second, the third by the third.
If you have N components, you keep going.
And, you sum all of these together.
OK, and important: this is a scalar.
OK, you do not get a vector. You get a number.
I know it sounds completely obvious from the definition here, but in the middle of the action when you're going to
do complicated problems, it's sometimes easy to forget. So, that's the definition.
What is it good for? Why would we ever want to do that? That's kind of a strange operation. So, probably to see
what it's good for, I should first tell you what it is geometrically.
OK, so what does it do geometrically?
Well, what you do when you multiply two vectors in this way, I claim the answer is equal to the length of A times
the length of B times the cosine of the angle between them. So, I have my vector, A, and if I have my vector, B,
and I have some angle between them, I multiply the length of A times the length of B times the cosine of that
angle.
So, that looks like a very artificial operation.
I mean, why would want to do that complicated multiplication?
Well, the basic answer is it tells us at the same time about lengths and about angles. And, the extra bonus thing is
that it's very easy to compute if you have components, see, that formula is actually pretty easy.
So, OK, maybe I should first tell you, how do we get this from that? Because, you know, in math, one tries to justify
everything to prove theorems.
So, if you want, that's the theorem.
That's the first theorem in 18.02.
So, how do we prove the theorem? How do we check that this is, indeed, correct using this definition?
So, in more common language, what does this geometric definition mean? Well, the first thing it means, before we
multiply two vectors, let's start multiplying a vector with itself. That's probably easier.
So, if we multiply a vector, A, with itself, using this dot product, so, by the way, I should point out, we put this dot
here.
That's why it's called dot product.
So, what this tells us is we should get the same thing as multiplying the length of A with itself, so, squared, times
the cosine of the angle. But now, the cosine of an angle, of zero, cosine of zero you all know is one. OK, so that's
going to be length A^2. Well, doesn't stand a chance of being true? Well, let's see.
If we do AdotA using this formula, we will get a1^2 a2^2 a3^2. That is, indeed, the square of the length. So, check.
That works. OK, now, what about two different vectors? Can we understand what this says, and how it relates to
that?
So, let's say that I have two different vectors, A and B, and I want to try to understand what's going on.
So, my claim is that we are going to be able to understand the relation between this and that in terms of the law of
cosines. So, the law of cosines is something that tells you about the length of the third side in the triangle like this
in terms of these two sides, and the angle here. OK, so the law of cosines, which hopefully you have seen before,
says that, so let me give a name to this side.
Let's call this side C, and as a vector, C is A minus B. It's minus B plus A.
So, it's getting a bit cluttered here.
So, the law of cosines says that the length of the third side in this triangle is equal to length A2 plus length B2.
Well, if I stopped here, that would be Pythagoras, but I don't have a right angle. So, I have a third term which is
twice length A, length B, cosine theta, OK? Has everyone seen this formula sometime? I hear some yeah's.
I hear some no's. Well, it's a fact about, I mean, you probably haven't seen it with vectors, but it's a fact about the
side lengths in a triangle.
And, well, let's say, if you haven't seen it before, then this is going to be a proof of the law of cosines if you believe
this. Otherwise, it's the other way around. So, let's try to see how this relates to what I'm saying about the dot
product.
So, I've been saying that length C^2, that's the same thing as CdotC, OK?
That, we have checked. Now, CdotC, well, C is A minus B. So, it's A minus B, dot product, A minus B.
Now, what do we want to do in a situation like that?
Well, we want to expand this into a sum of four terms.
Are we allowed to do that? Well, we have this dot product that's a mysterious new operation.
We don't really know. Well, the answer is yes, we can do it. You can check from this definition that it behaves in
the usual way in terms of expanding, vectoring, and so on.
So, I can write that as AdotA minus AdotB minus BdotA plus BdotB. So, AdotA is length A^2.
Let me jump ahead to the last term.
BdotB is length B^2, and then these two terms, well, they're the same. You can check from the definition that
AdotB and BdotA are the same thing.
Well, you see that this term, I mean, this is the only difference between these two formulas for the length of C.
So, if you believe in the law of cosines, then it tells you that, yes, this a proof that AdotB equals length A length B
cosine theta. Or, vice versa, if you've never seen the law of cosines, you are willing to believe this. Then, this is
the proof of the law of cosines. So, the law of cosines, or this interpretation, are equivalent to each other.
OK, any questions? Yes?
So, in the second one there isn't a cosine theta because I'm just expanding a dot product. OK, so I'm just writing C
equals A minus B, and then I'm expanding this algebraically. And then, I get to an answer that has an A.B. So
then, if I wanted to express that without a dot product, then I would have to introduce a cosine. And, I would get
the same as that, OK? So, yeah, if you want, the next step to recall the law of cosines would be plug in this
formula for AdotB. And then you would have a cosine. OK, let's keep going.
OK, so what is this good for? Now that we have a definition, we should figure out what we can do with it.
So, what are the applications of dot product?
Well, will this discover new applications of dot product throughout the entire semester,but let me tell you at least
about those that are readily visible.
So, one is to compute lengths and angles, especially angles.
So, let's do an example. Let's say that, for example, I have in space, I have a point, P, which is at (1,0,0).
I have a point, Q, which is at (0,1,0).
So, it's at distance one here, one here.
And, I have a third point, R at (0,0,2), so it's at height two. And, let's say that I'm curious, and I'm wondering what
is the angle here?
So, here I have a triangle in space connect P, Q, and R, and I'm wondering, what is this angle here?
OK, so, of course, one solution is to build a model and then go and measure the angle.
But, we can do better than that. We can just find the angle using dot product. So, how would we do that?
Well, so, if we look at this formula, we see, so, let's say that we want to find the angle here.
Well, let's look at the formula for PQdotPR.
Well, we said it should be length PQ times length PR times the cosine of the angle, OK?
Now, what do we know, and what do we not know?
Well, certainly at this point we don't know the cosine of the angle. That's what we would like to find. The lengths,
certainly we can compute. We know how to find these lengths. And, this dot product we know how to compute
because we have an easy formula here.
OK, so we can compute everything else and then find theta. So, I'll tell you what we will do is we will find theta -- --
in this way.
We'll take the dot product of PQ with PR, and then we'll divide by the lengths.
OK, so let's see. So, we said cosine theta is PQdotPR over length PQ length PR.
So, let's try to figure out what this vector, PQ, well, to go from P to Q, I should go minus one unit along the x
direction plus one unit along the y direction. And, I'm not moving in the z direction. So, to go from P to Q, I have to
move by ***amp***lt;-1,1,0***amp***gt;.
To go from P to R, I go -1 along the x axis and 2 along the z axis. So, PR, I claim, is this.
OK, then, the lengths of these vectors, well,(-1)^2 (1)^2 (0)^2, square root, and then same thing with the other
one. OK, so, the denominator will become the square root of 2, and there's a square root of 5.
What about the numerator? Well, so, remember, to do the dot product, we multiply this by this, and that by that,
that by that.
And, we add. Minus 1 times minus 1 makes 1 plus 1 times 0, that's 0.
Zero times 2 is 0 again. So, we will get 1 over square root of 10. That's the cosine of the angle.
And, of course if we want the actual angle, well, we have to take a calculator, find the inverse cosine, and you'll
find it's about 71.5°.
Actually, we'll be using mostly radians, but for today, that's certainly more speaking. OK, any questions about
that?
No? OK, so in particular, I should point out one thing that's really neat about the answer. I mean, we got this
number.
We don't really know what it means exactly because it mixes together the lengths and the angle.
But, one thing that's interesting here, it's the sign of the answer, the fact that we got a positive number. So, if you
think about it, the lengths are always positive.
So, the sign of a dot product is the same as a sign of cosine theta. So, in fact, the sign of AdotB is going to be
positive if the angle is less than 90°. So, that means geometrically, my two vectors are going more or less in the
same direction.
They make an acute angle. It's going to be zero if the angle is exactly 90°, OK, because that's when the cosine
will be zero. And, it will be negative if the angle is more than 90°. So, that means they go, however, in opposite
directions.
So, that's basically one way to think about what dot product measures. It measures how much the two vectors are
going along each other.
OK, and that actually leads us to the next application.
So, let's see, did I have a number one there?
Yes. So, if I had a number one, I must have number two. The second application is to detect orthogonality. It's to
figure out when two things are perpendicular. OK, so orthogonality is just a complicated word from Greek to say
things are perpendicular.
So, let's just take an example. Let's say I give you the equation x 2y 3z = 0. OK, so that defines a certain set of
points in space, and what do you think the set of solutions look like if I give you this equation?
So far I see one, two, three answers, OK. So, I see various competing answers, but, yeah, I see a lot of people
voting for answer number four. I see also some I don't knows, and some other things. But, the majority vote
seems to be a plane. And, indeed that's the correct answer. So, how do we see that it's a
plane?
So, I should say, this is the equation of a plane. So, there's many ways to see that, and I'm not going to give you
all of them.
But, here's one way to think about it.
So, let's think geometrically about how to express this condition in terms of vectors. So, let's take the origin O, by
convention is the point (0,0,0).
And, let's take a point, P, that will satisfy this equation on it, so, at coordinates x, y, z. So, what does this condition
here mean? Well, it means the following thing. So, let's take the vector, OP.
OK, so vector OP, of course, has components x, y, z. Now, we can think of this as actually a dot product between
OP and a mysterious vector that won't remain mysterious for very long, namely, the vector one, two, three.
OK, so, this condition is the same as OP.A equals zero, right? If I take the dot product OPdotA I get x times one
plus y times two plus z times three.
But now, what does it mean that the dot product between OP and A is zero? Well, it means that OP and A are
perpendicular. OK, so I have this vector, A.
I'm not going to be able to draw it realistically.
Let's say it goes this way. Then, a point, P, solves this equation exactly when the vector from O to P is
perpendicular to A. And, I claim that defines a plane. For example, if it helps you to see it, take a vertical vector.
What does it mean to be perpendicular to the vertical vector? It means you are horizontal.
It's the horizontal plane. Here, it's a plane that passes through the origin and is perpendicular to this vector, A. OK,
so what we get is a plane through the origin perpendicular to A.
And, in general, what you should remember is that two vectors have a dot product equal to zero if and only if
that's equivalent to the cosine of the angle between them is zero. That means the angle is 90°.
That means A and B are perpendicular.
So, we have a very fast way of checking whether two vectors are perpendicular. So, one additional application I
think we'll see actually tomorrow is to find the components of a vector along a certain direction.
So, I claim we can use this intuition I gave about dot product telling us how much to vectors go in the same
direction to actually give a precise meaning to the notion of component for vector, not just along the x, y, or z axis,
but along any direction in space. So, I think I should probably stop here. But, I will see you tomorrow at 2:00 here,
and we'll learn more about that and about cross products

Thank you. Let's continue with vectors and operations of them. Remember we saw the topic yesterday was dot
product. And remember the definition of dot product, well, the dot product of two vectors is obtained by multiplying
the first component with the first component, the second with the second and so on and summing these and you
get the scalar.
And the geometric interpretation of that is that you can also take the length of A, take the length of B multiply them
and multiply that by the cosine of the angle between the two vectors.
We have seen several applications of that.
One application is to find lengths and angles.
For example, you can use this relation to give you the cosine of the angle between two vectors is the dot product
divided by the product of the lengths.
Another application that we have is to detect whether two vectors are perpendicular. To decide if two vectors are
perpendicular to each other, all we have to do is compute our dot product and see if we get zero.
And one further application that we did not have time to discuss yesterday that I will mention very quickly is to find
components of, let's say, a vector A along a direction u. So some unit vector.
Let me explain. Let's say that I have some direction. For example, the horizontal axis on this blackboard.
But it could be any direction in space.
And, to describe this direction, maybe I have a unit vector along this axis. Let's say that I have any of a vector A
and I want to find out what is the component of A along u. That means what is the length of this projection of A to
the given direction?
This thing here is the component of A along u.
Well, how do we find that? Well, we know that here we have a right angle. So this component is just length A times
cosine of the angle between A and u.
But now that means I should be able to compute it very easily because that's the same as length A times length u
times cosine theta because u is a unit vector.
It is a unit vector. That means this is equal to one.
And so that's the same as the dot product between A and u.
That is very easy. And, of course, the most of just cases of that is say, for example, we want just to find the
component along i hat, the unit vector along the x axis.
Then you do the dot product with i hat, which is 100.
What you get is the first component.
And that is, indeed, the x component of a vector. Similarly, say you want the z component you do the dot product
with k that gives you the last component of your vector. But the same works with a unit vector in any direction. So
what is an application of that? Well, for example, in physics maybe you have seen situations where you have a
pendulum that swings. You have maybe some mass at the end of the string and that mass swings back and forth
on a circle. And to analyze this mechanically you want to use, of course, Newton's Laws of Mechanics and you
want to use forces and so on, but I claim that components of vectors are useful here to understand what happens
geometrically. What are the forces exerted on this pendulum? Well, there is its weight, which usually points
downwards, and there is the tension of the string. And these two forces together are what explains how this
pendulum is going to move back and forth. Now, you could try to understand the equations of motion using x, y
coordinates or x, z or whatever you want to call them, let's say x, y.
But really what causes the pendulum to swing back and forth and also to somehow stay a constant distance are
phenomenal relative to this circular trajectory.
For example, maybe instead of taking components along the x and y axis, we want to look at two other unit
vectors. We can look at a vector, let's call it T, that is tangent to the trajectory. Sorry. Can you read that?
It's not very readable. T is tangent to the trajectory.
And, on the other hand, we can introduce another vector. Let's call that N.
And that one is normal, perpendicular to the trajectory. And so now if you think about it you can look at the
components of the weight along the tangent direction and along the normal direction.
And so the component of F along the tangent direction is what causes acceleration in the direction along the
trajectory.
It is what causes the pendulum to swing back and forth.
And the component along N, on the other hand.
That is the part of the weight that tends to pull our mass away from this point. It is what is going to be responsible
for the tension of the string.
It is why the string is taut and not actually slack and with things moving all over the place.
That one is responsible for the tension of a string.
And now, of course, if you want to compute things, well, maybe you will call this angle theta and then you will
express things explicitly using sines and cosines and you will solve for the equations of motion.
That would be a very interesting physics problem.
But, to save time, we are not going to do it.
I'm sure you've seen that in 8.01 or similar classes.
And so to find these components we will just do dot products.
Any questions? No.
OK. Let's move onto our next topic.
Here we have found things about lengths, angles and stuff like that. One important concept that we have not
understood yet in terms of vectors is area.
Let's say that we want to find the area of this pentagon.
Well, how do we compute that using vectors?
Can we do it using vectors? Yes we can.
And that is going to be the goal.
The first thing we should do is probably simplify the problem.
We don't actually need to bother with pentagons.
All we need to know are triangles because, for example, you can cut that in three triangles and then sum the
areas of the triangles.
Perhaps easier, what is the area of a triangle?
Let's start with a triangle in the plane.
Well, then we need two vectors to describe it, say A and B here. How do we find the area of a triangle? Well, we
all know base times height over two. What is the base?
What is the height? The area of this triangle is going to be one-half of the base, which is going to be the length of
A. And the height, well, if you call theta this angle, then this is length B sine theta. Now, that looks a lot like the
formula we had there, except for one little catch.
This is a sine instead of a cosine.
How do we deal with that? Well, what we could do is first find the cosine of the angle. We know how to find the
cosine of the angle using dot products. Then solve for sine using sine square plus cosine square equals one.
And then plug that back into here.
Well, that works but it is kind of a very complicated way of doing it. So there is an easier way.
And that is going to be determinants, but let me explain how we get to that maybe still doing elementary geometry
and dot products first.
Let's see. What we can do is instead of finding the sine of theta, well, we're not good at finding sines of angles but
we are very good now at finding cosines of angles.
Maybe we can find another angle whose cosine is the same as the sine of theta. Well, you have already heard
about complimentary angles and how I take my vector A, my vector B here and I have an angle theta.
Well, let's say that I rotate my vector A by 90 degrees to get a new vector A prime. A prime is just A rotated by 90
degrees. Then the angle between these two guys, let's say theta prime, well, theta prime is 90 degrees or pi over
two gradients minus theta.
So, in particular, cosine of theta prime is equal to sine of theta. In particular, that means that length A, length B,
sine theta, which is what we would need to know in order to find the area of this triangle is equal to, well, A and A
prime have the same length so let me replace that by length of A prime.
I am not changing anything, length B, cosine theta prime.
And now we have something that is much easier for us.
Because that is just A prime dot B.
That looks like a very good plan.
There is only one small thing which is we don't know yet how to find this A prime. Well, I think it is not very hard.
Let's see.
Actually, why don't you guys do the hard work?
Let's say that I have a plane vector A with two components a1, a2. And I want to rotate it counterclockwise by 90
degrees. It looks like maybe we should change some signs somewhere. Maybe we should do something with the
components. Can you come up with an idea of what it might be? I see a lot of people answering three. I see some
other answers, but the majority vote seems to be number three.
Minus a2 and a1. I think I agree, so let's see.
Let's say that we have this vector A with components a1.
So a1 is here. And a2. So a2 is here.
Let's rotate this box by 90 degrees counterclockwise.
This box ends up there. It's the same box just flipped on its side. This thing here becomes a1 and this thing here
becomes a2. And that means our new vector A prime is going to be -- Well, the first component looks like an a2
but it is pointing to the left when a2 is positive.
So, actually, it is minus a2. And the y component is going to be the same as this guy, so it's going to be a1.
If you wanted instead to rotate clockwise then you would do the opposite. You would do a2 minus a1.
Is that reasonably clear for everyone?
OK. Let's continue the calculation there. A prime, we have decided, is minus a2, a1 dot product with let's call b1
and b2, the components of B. Then that will be minus a2, b1 plus a1, b2 plus a1, b2.
Let me write that the other way around, a1, b2 minus a2, b1. And that is a quantity that you may already know
under the name of determinant of vectors A and B, which we write symbolically using this notation.
We put A and B next to each other inside a two-by-two table and we put these verticals bars. And that means the
determinant of these numbers, this guy times this guy minus this guy times this guy. That is called the
determinant.
And geometrically what it measures is the area, well, not of a triangle because we did not divide by two, but of a
parallelogram formed by A and B.
It measures the area of the parallelogram with sides A and B. And, of course, if you want the triangle then you will
just divide by two.
The triangle is half the parallelogram.
There is one small catch. The area usually is something that is going to be positive. This guy here has no reason
to be positive or negative because, in fact, well, if you compute things you will see that where it is supposed to go
negative it depends on whether A and B are clockwise or counterclockwise from each other.
I mean the issue that we have -- Well, when we say the area is one-half length A, length B, sine theta that was
assuming that theta is positive, that its sine is positive.
Otherwise, if theta is negative maybe we need to take the absolute value of this. Just to be more truthful, I will say
the determinant is either plus or minus the area.
Any questions about this? Yes.
Sorry. That is not a dot product.
That is the usual multiplication.
That is length A times length B times sine theta.
What does that equal? And so that is equal to the area of a parallelogram. Sorry.
Let me explain that again. If I have two vectors A and B, I can form a parallelogram with them or I can form a
triangle.
And so the area of a parallelogram is equal to length A, length B, sine theta, is equal to the determinant of A and
B. While the area of a triangle is one-half of that.
And, again, to be truthful, I should say these things can be positive or negative. Depending on whether you count
the angle positively or negatively, you will get either the area or minus the area. The area is actually the absolute
value of these quantities.
Is that clear? OK.
Yes. If you want to compute the area, you will just take the absolute value of the determinant.
I should say the area of a parallelogram so that it is completely clear. Sorry. Do you have a question?
Explain again, sorry, was the question how a determinant equals the area of a parallelogram?
OK. The area of a parallelogram is going to be the base times the height.
Let's take this guy to be the base.
The length of a base will be length of A and the height will be obtained by taking B but only looking at the vertical
part.
That will be length of B times the sine of theta.
That is how I got the area of a parallelogram as length A, length B, sine theta. And then I did this manipulation and
this trick of rotating to find a nice formula.
Yes. You are asking ahead of what I am going to do in a few minutes. You are asking about magnitude of A cross
B. We are going to learn about cross products in a few minutes. And the answer is yes, but cross product is for
vectors in space.
Here I was simplifying things by doing things just in the plane. Just bear with me for five more minutes and we will
do things in space.
Yes. That is correct. The way you compute this in practice is you just do this. That is how you compute the
determinant. Yes.
What about three dimensions? Three dimensions we are going to do now. More questions?
Should we move on? OK. Let's move to space.
There are two things we can do in space.
And you can look for the volume of solids or you can look for the area of surfaces. Let me start with the easier of
the two. Let me start with volumes of solids. And we will go back to area, I promise. I claim that there is also a
notion of determinants in space. And that is going to tell us how to find volumes. Let's say that we have three
vectors A, B and C. And then the definition of their determinants going to be, the notation for that in terms of the
components is the same as over there.
We put the components of A, the components of B and the components of C inside verticals bars.
And, of course, I have to give meaning to this.
This will be a number. And what is that number?
Well, the definition I will take is that this is a1 times the determinant of what I get by looking in this lower right
corner. The two-by-two determinant b2, b3, c2, c3. Then I will subtract a2 times the determinant of b1, b3, c1, c3.
And then I will add a3 times the determinant b1, b2, c1, c2. And each of these guys means, again, you take b2
times c3 minus c2 times b3 and this times that minus this time that and so on.
In fact, there is a total of six terms in here.
And maybe some of you have already seen a different formula for three-by-three determinants where you directly
have the six terms. It is the same definition.
How to remember the structure of this formula?
Well, this is called an expansion according to the first row. So we are going to take the entries in the first row, a1,
a2, a3 And for each of them we get the term. Namely we multiply it by a two-by-two determinant that we get by
deleting the first row and the column where we are. Here the coefficient next to a1, when we delete this column
and this row, we are left with b2, b3, c2, c3.
The next one we take a2, we delete the row that is in it and the column that it is in. And we are left with b1, b3, c1,
c3. And, similarly, with a3, we take what remains, which is b1, b2, c1, c2. Finally, last but not least, there is a
minus sign here for the second guy.
It looks like a weird formula. I mean it is a little bit weird.
But it is a formula that you should learn because it is really, really useful for a lot of things.
I should say if this looks very artificial to you and you would like to know more there is more in the notes, so read
the notes. They will tell you a bit more about what this means, where it comes from and so on.
If you want to know a lot more then some day you should take 18.06, Linear Algebra where you will learn a lot
more about determinants in N dimensional space with N vectors. And there is a generalization of this in arbitrary
dimensions. In this class, we will only deal with two or three dimensions.
Yes. Why is the negative there?
Well, that is a very good question.
It has to be there so that this will actually equal, well, what I am going to say right now is that this will give us the
volume of [a box?] with sides A, B, C. And the formula just doesn't work if you don't put the negative.
There is a more fundamental reason which has to do with orientation of space and the fact that if you switch two
coordinates in space then basically you change what is called the handedness of the coordinates.
If you look at your right hand and your left hand, they are not actually the same. They are mirror images.
And, if you squared two coordinate axes, that is what you get. That is the fundamental reason for the minus.
Again, we don't need to think too much about that. All we need in this class is the formula. Why do we care about
this formula? It is because of the theorem that says that geometrically the determinant of the three vectors A, B, C
is, again, plus or minus.
This determinant could be positive or negative.
See those minuses and all sorts of stuff.
Plus or minus the volume of the parallelepiped.
That is just a fancy name for a box with parallelogram sides, in case you wonder, with sides A, B and C. You take
the three vectors A, B and C and you form a box whose sides are all parallelograms. And when its volume is going
to be the determinant. Other questions?
I'm sorry. I cannot quite hear you.
Yes. We are going to see how to do it geometrically without a determinant, but then you will see that you actually
need a determinant to compute it no matter what. We are going to go back to this and see another formula for
volume, but you will see that really I am cheating. I mean somehow computationally the only way to compute it is
really to use a determinant.
That is correct. In general, I mean, actually, I could say if you look at the two-by-two determinant, see, you can
also explain it in terms of this extension. If you take a1 and multiply by this one-by-one determinant b2, then you
take a2 and you multiply it by this one-by-one determinant b1 but you put a minus sign. And in general, indeed,
when you expand, you would stop putting plus, minus, plus, minus alternating.
More about that in 18.06. Yes.
There is a way to do it based on other rows as well, but then you have to be very careful with the sign vectors.
I will refer you to the notes for that.
I mean you could also do it with a column, by the way. I mean be careful about the sign rules. Given how little we
will use determinants in this class, I mean we will use them in a way that is fundamental, but we won't compute
much.
Let's say this is going to be enough for us for now.
After determinants now I can tell you about cross product.
And cross product is going to be the answer to your question about area.
OK. Let me move onto cross product.
Cross product is something that you can apply to two vectors in space. And by that I mean really in threedimensional space. This is something that is specific to three dimensions. The definition A cross B -- It is important
to really do your multiplication symbol well so that you don't mistake it with a dot product.
Well, that is going to be a vector.
That is another reason not to confuse it with dot product.
Dot product gives you a number. Cross product gives you a vector. They are really completely different
operations. They are both called product because someone could not come up with a better name, but they are
completely different operations.
What do we do to do the cross product of A and B?
Well, we do something very strange.
Just as I have told you that a determinant is something where we put numbers and we get a number, I am going
to violate my own rule. I am going to put together a determinant in which -- Well, the last two rows are the
components of the vectors A and B but the first row strangely consists for unit vectors i, j, k.
What does that mean? Well, that is not a determinant in the usual sense. If you try to put that into your calculator,
it will tell you there is an error. I don't know how to put vectors in there. I want numbers.
What is means is it is symbolic notation that helps you remember what the formula is. The actual formula is, well,
you use this definition. And, if you use that definition, you see that it is i hat times some number.
Let me write it as determinant of a2, a3, b2, b3 times i hat minus determinant a1, a3, b1, b3, j hat plus a1, a2, b1,
b2, k hat.
And so that is the actual definition in a way that makes complete sense, but to remember this formula without too
much trouble it is much easier to think about it in these terms here. That is the definition and it gives you a vector.
Now, as usual with definitions, the question is what is it good for?
What is the geometric meaning of this very strange operation?
Why do we bother to do that? Here is what it does geometrically. Remember a vector has two different things. It
has a length and it has a direction. Let's start with the length.
A length of a cross product is the area of the parallelogram in space formed by the vectors A and B.
Now, if you have a parallelogram in space, you can find its area just by doing this calculation when you know the
coordinates of the points.
You do this calculation and then you take the length.
You take this squared plus that squared plus that squared, square root. It looks like a very complicated formula
but it works and, actually, it is the simplest way to do it.
This time we don't actually need to put plus or minus because the length of a vector is always positive.
We don't have to worry about that.
And what is even more magical is that not only is the length remarkable but the direction is also remarkable.
The direction of A cross B is perpendicular to the plane of a parallelogram. Our two vectors A and B together in a
plane. What I am telling you is that for vector A cross B will point, will stick straight out of that plane perpendicularly
to it. In fact, I would have to be more precise. There are two ways that you can be perpendicular to this plane. You
can be perpendicular pointing up or pointing down. How do I decide which?
Well, there is something called the right-hand rule.
What does the right-hand rule say?
Well, there are various versions for right-hand rule depending on which country you learn about it.
In France, given the culture, you even learn about it in terms of a cork screw and a wine bottle.
I will just use the usual version here.
You take your right hand. If you are left-handed, remember to take your right hand and not the left one.
The other right, OK? Then place your hand to point in the direction of A. Let's say my right hand is going in that
direction. Now, curl your fingers so that they point towards B. Here that would be kind of into the blackboard. Don't
snap any bones.
If it doesn't quite work then rotate your arms so that you can actually physically do it. Then get your thumb to stick
straight out. Well, here my thumb is going to go up. And that tells me that A cross B will go up. Let me write that
down while you experiment with it. Again, try not to enjoy yourselves.
First, your right hand points parallel to vector A.
Then your fingers point in the direction of B.
Then your thumb, when you stick it out, is going to point in the direction of A cross B.
Let's do a quick example. Where is my quick example? Here.
Let's take i cross j.
I see most of you going in the right direction.
If you have it pointing in the wrong direction, it might mean that you are using your left hand, for example.
Example, I claim that i cross j equals k. Let's see. I points towards us.
J point to our right. I guess this is your right.
I think. And then your thumb is going to point up. That tells us it is roughly pointing up. And, of course, the length
should be one because if you take the unit square in the x, y plane, its area is one.
And the direction should be vertical.
Because it should be perpendicular to the x, y plane. It looks like i cross j will be k. Well, let's check with the
definition i, j, k.
What is i? I is one, zero, zero. J is zero, one, zero.
The coefficient of i will be zero times zero minus zero times one. That is zero.
The coefficient of j will be one time zero minus zero times zero, that is a zero, minus zero j.
It doesn't matter. And the coefficient of k will be one times one, that is one, minus zero times zero, so one k.
So we do get i cross j equals k both ways.
In this case, it is easier to do it geometrically. If I give you no complicated vectors, probably you will actually want
to do the calculation. Any questions? Yes.
The coefficient of k, remember I delete the first row and the last column so I get this two-by-two determinant.
And that two-by-two determinant is one times one minus zero times zero so that gives me a one.
That is what you do with two-by-two determinants.
Similarly for [UNINTELLIGIBLE], but [UNINTELLIGIBLE] turn out to be zero. More questions?
Yes. Let me repeat how I got the one in front of k. Remember the definition of a determinant I expand according
to the entries in the first row.
When I get to k what I do is delete the first row and I delete the last column, the column that contains k.
I delete these guys and these guys and I am left with this two-by-two determinant. Now, a two-by-two determinant,
you multiply according to this downward diagonal and then minus this times that. One times one, let me see here,
I got one k because that is one times one minus zero times zero equals one.
Sorry. That is really hard to read.
Maybe it will be easier that way.
Yes. Let's try.
If I do the same for i, I think I will also get zero.
Let's do the same for i. I take i, I delete the first row, I delete the first column, I get this two-by-two determinant
here and I get zero times zero, that is zero, minus zero times one.
That is the other trick question.
Zero times one is zero as well. So that zero minus zero is zero. I hope on Monday you should get more practice in
recitation about how to compute determinants. Hopefully, it will become very easy for you all to compute this next.
I know the first time it is kind of a shock because there are a lot of numbers and a lot of things to do.
Let me return to the question that you asked a bit earlier about how do you find actually volume if I don't want to
know about determinants? Well, let's have another look at the volume. Let's say that I have three vectors. Let me
put them this way, A, B and C. And let's try to see how else I could think about the volume of this box.
Probably you know that the volume of a parallelepiped is the area of a base times the height.
Sorry. The volume is the area of a base times the height. How do we do that in practice?
Well, what is the area of a base?
The base is a parallelogram in space with sides B and C.
How do we find the area of the parallelogram in space?
Well, we just discovered that. We can do it by taking that cross product. The area of a base, well, we take the
cross product of B and C.
That is not quite it because this is a vector.
We would like a number while we take its length.
That is pretty good. What about the height?
Well, the height is going to be the component of A in the direction that is perpendicular to the base.
Let's take a direction that is perpendicular to the base.
Let's call that N, a unit vector in that direction. Then we can get the height by taking A dot n. That is what we saw
at the beginning of class that A dot n will tell me how much A goes in the direction of n. Are you still with me?
OK. Let's keep going.
Let's think about this vector n.
How do I get it? Well, I can get it by actually using cross product as well. Because I said the direction
perpendicular to two vectors I can get by taking that cross product and looking at that direction.
This is still B cross C length. And this one is, so I claim, n can be obtained by taking D cross C.
Well, that comes in the right direction but it is not a unit vector. How do I get a unit vector?
I divide by the length. Thanks.
I take B cross C and I divide by length B cross C.
Well, now I can probably simplify between these two guys.
And so what I will get -- What I get out of this is that my volume equals A dot product with vector B cross C.
But, of course, I have to be careful in which order I do it. If I do it the other way around, A dot B, I get a number.
I cannot cross that. I really have to do the cross product first. I get the new vector.
Then my dot product. The fact is that the determinant of A, B, C is equal to this so-called triple product. Well, that
looks good geometrically. Let's try to check whether it makes sense with the formulas, just one small thing.
We saw the determinant is a1 times determinant b2, b3, c2, c3 minus a2 times something plus a3 times
something. I will let you fill in the numbers. That is this guy.
What about this guy? Well, dot product, we take the first component of A, that is a1, we multiply by the first
component of B cross C.
What is the first component of B cross C?
Well, it is this determinant b2, b3, c2, c3.
If you put B and C instead of A and B into there you will get the i component is this guy plus a2 times the second
component which is minus some determinant plus a3 times the third component which is, again, a determinant.
And you can check. You get exactly the same expression, so everything is fine.
There is no contradiction in math just yet.
On Tuesday we will continue with this and we will start going into matrices, equations of planes and so on.
Meanwhile, have a good weekend and please start working on your Problem Sets so that you can ask lots of
questions to your TAs on Monday.

Remember last
time -- -- we learned about the cross product of vectors in space. Remember the definition of cross product is in
terms of this determinant det| i hat, j hat, k hat, and then the components of A, a1, a2, a3, and then the
components of B| This is not an actual determinant because these are not numbers. But it's a symbolic notation,
to remember what the actual formula is. The actual formula is obtained by expanding the determinant. So, we
actually get the determinant of a2, a3, b2, b3 times i hat, minus the determinant of a1, a3, b1, b3 times j hat plus
the determinant of a1, a2, b1, b2, times k hat. And we also saw a more geometric definition of the cross product.
We have learned that the length of the cross product is equal to the area of the parallelogram with sides A and B.
We have also learned that the direction of the cross product is given by taking the direction that's perpendicular to
A and B. If I draw A and B in a plane (they determine a plane), then the cross product should go in the direction
that's perpendicular to that plane. Now, there's two different possible directions that are perpendicular to a plane.
And, to decide which one it is, we use the right-hand rule, which says if you extend your right hand in the direction
of the vector A, then curve your fingers in the direction of B, then your thumb will go in the direction of the cross
product. One thing I didn't quite get to say last time is that there are some funny manipulation rules. What are we
allowed to do or not do with cross products? So, let me tell you right away the most surprising one if you've never
seen it before: A cross B and B cross A are not the same thing. Why are they not the same thing? Well, one way
to see it is to think geometrically. The parallelogram still has the same area, and it's still in the same plane. So, the
cross product is still perpendicular to the same plane. But, what happens is that, if you try to apply the right-hand
rule but exchange the roles of A and B, then you will either injure yourself, or your thumb will end up pointing in the
opposite direction. So, in fact, B cross A and A cross B are opposite of each other. And you can check that in the
formula because, for example, the i component is a2 b3 minus a3 b2. If you swap the roles of A and B, you will
also have to change the signs. That's a slightly surprising thing, but you will see one easily adjusts to it. It just
means one must resist the temptation to write AxB equals BxA. Whenever you do that, put a minus sign. Now, in
particular, what happens if I do A cross A? Well, I will get zero. And, there's many ways to see that. One is to use
the formula. Also, you can see that the parallelogram formed by A and A is completely flat, and it has area zero.
So, we get the zero vector. Hopefully you got practice with cross products, and computing them, in recitation
yesterday. Let me just point out one important application of cross product that maybe you haven't seen yet. Let's
say that I'm given three points in space, and I want to find the equation of the plane that contains them. So, say I
have P1, P2, P3, three points in space. They determine a plane, at least if they are not aligned, and we would like
to find the equation of the plane that they determine. That means, let's say that we have a point, P, in space with
coordinates x, y, z. Well, to find the equation of the plane -- -- the plane containing P1, P2, and P3, we need to find
a condition on the coordinates x, y, z, telling us whether P is in the plane or not. We have several ways of doing
that. For example, one thing we could do. Let me just backtrack to determinants that we saw last time. One way to
think about it is to consider these vectors, P1P2, P1P3, and P1P. The question of whether they are all in the same
plane is the same as asking ourselves whether the parallelepiped that they form is actually completely flattened.
So, if I try to form a parallelepiped with these three sides, and P is not in the plane, then it will have some volume.
But, if P is in the plane, then it's actually completely squished. So,one possible answer, one possible way to think
of the equation of a plane is that the determinant of these vectors should be zero. Take the determinant of (vector
P1P,vector P1P2,vector P1P3) equals 0 (if you do it in a different order it doesn't really matter). One possible way
to express the condition that P is in the plane is to say that the determinant of these three vectors has to be zero.
And, if I am given coordinates for these points -- I'm not giving you numbers, but if I gave you numbers, then you
would be able to plug those numbers in. So, you could compute these two vectors P1P2 and P1P3 explicitly. But,
of course, P1P would depend on x, y, and z. So, when you compute the determinant, you get a formula that
involves x, y, and z. And you'll find that this condition on x, y, z is the equation of a plane. We're going to see more
about that pretty soon. Now, let me tell you a slightly faster way of doing it. Actually, it's not much faster, It's pretty
much the same calculation, but it's maybe more enlightening. Let me actually show you a nice color picture that I
prepared for this. One thing that's on this picture that I haven't drawn before is the normal vector to the plane.
Why is that? Well, let's say that we know how to find a vector that's perpendicular to our plane. Then, what does it
mean for the point, P, to be in the plane? It means that the direction from P1 to P has to be perpendicular to this
vector N. So here's another solution: P is in the plane exactly when the vector P1P is perpendicular to N, where N
is some vector that's perpendicular to the plane. N is called a normal vector. How do we rephrase this condition?
Well, we've learned how to detect whether two vectors are perpendicular to each other using dot product (that was
the first lecture). These two vectors are perpendicular exactly when their dot product is zero. So, concretely, if we
have a point P1 given to us, and say we have been able to compute the vector N, then when we actually compute
what happens, here we will have the coordinates x, y, z, of a point P, and we will get some condition on x, y, z.
That will be the equation of a plane. Now, why are these things the same? Well, before I can tell you that, I should
tell you how to find a normal vector. Maybe you are already starting to see what the method should be, because
we know how to find a vector perpendicular to two given vectors. We know two vectors in that plane, for example,
P1P2, and P1P3. Actually, I could have used another permutation of these points, but, let's use this. So, if I want to
find a vector that's perpendicular to both P1P2 and P1P3 at the same time, all I have to do is take their cross
product. So, how do we find a vector that's perpendicular to the plane? The answer is just the cross product P1P2
cross P1P3. Say you actually took the points in a different order, and you took P1P3 x P1P2. You would get, of
course, the opposite vector. That is fine. Any plane actually has infinitely many normal vectors. You can just
multiply a normal vector by any constant, you will still get a normal vector. So, that's going to be one of the main
multiply a normal vector by any constant, you will still get a normal vector. So, that's going to be one of the main
uses of dot product. When we know two vectors in a plane, it lets us find the normal vector to the plane, and that is
what we need to find the equation. Now, why is that the same as our first answer over there? Well, the condition
that we have is that P1P dot N should be 0. And we said N is actually P1P2 cross P1P3. So, this is what we want to
be zero. Now, if you remember, a long time ago (that was Friday) we've introduced this thing and called it the
triple product. And what we've seen is that the triple product is the same thing as the determinant. So, in fact,
these two ways of thinking, one saying that the box formed by these three vectors should be flat and have volume
zero, and the other one saying that we can find a normal vector and then express the condition that a vector is in
the plane if it's perpendicular to the normal vector, are actually giving us the same formula in the end. OK, any
quick questions before we move on? STUDENT QUESTION: are those two equal only when P is in the plane, or
no matter where it is? So, these two quantities, P1P dot the cross product, or the determinant of the three vectors,
are always equal to each other. They are always the same. And now, if a point is not in the plane, then their
numerical value will be nonzero. If P is in the plane, it will be zero. OK, let's move on and talk a bit about matrices.
Probably some of you have learnt about matrices a little bit in high school, but certainly not all of you. So let me
just introduce you to a little bit about matrices -- just enough for what we will need later on in this class. If you want
to know everything about the secret life of matrices, then you should take 18.06 someday. OK, what's going to be
our motivation for matrices? Well, in life, a lot of things are related by linear formulas. And, even if they are not,
maybe sometimes you can approximate them by linear formulas. So, often, we have linear relations between
variables -- for example, if we do a change of coordinate systems. For example, say that we are in space, and we
have a point. Its coordinates might be, let me call them x1, x2, x3 in my initial coordinate system. But then, maybe
I need to actually switch to different coordinates to better solve the problem because they're more adapted to
other things that we'll do in the problem. And so I have other coordinates axes, and in these new coordinates, P
will have different coordinates -- let me call them, say, u1, u2, u3. And then, the relation between the old and the
new coordinates is going to be given by linear formulas -- at least if I choose the same origin. Otherwise, there
might be constant terms, which I will not insist on. Let me just give an example. For example, maybe, let's say u1
could be 2 x1 3 x2 3 x3. u2 might be 2 x1 4 x2 5 x3. u3 might be x1 x2 2 x3. Do not ask me where these numbers
come from. I just made them up, that's just an example of what might happen. You can put here your favorite
numbers if you want. Now, in order to express this kind of linear relation, we can use matrices. A matrix is just a
table with numbers in it. And we can reformulate this in terms of matrix multiplication or matrix product. So, instead
of writing this, I will write that the matrix |2,3, 3; 2,4, 5; 1,1, 2| times the vector ***amp***lt;x1, x2, x3> is equal to
***amp***lt;u1, u2, u3>. Hopefully you see that there is the same information content on both sides. I just need to
explain to you what this way of multiplying tables of numbers means. Well, what it means is really that we'll have
exactly these same quantities. Let me just say that more symbolically: so maybe this matrix could be called A, and
this we could call X, and this one we could call U. Then we'll say A times X equals U, which is a lot shorter than
that. Of course, I need to tell you what A, X, and U are in terms of their entries for you to get the formula. But it's a
convenient notation. So, what does it mean to do a matrix product? The entries in the matrix product are obtained
by taking dot products. Let's say we are doing the product AX. We do a dot products between the rows of A and
the columns of X. Here, A is a 3x3 matrix -- that just means there's three rows and three columns. And X is a
column vector, which we can think of as a 3x1 matrix. It has three rows and only one column. Now, what can we
do? Well, I said we are going to do a dot product between a row of A: 2,3, 3, and a column of X: x1, x2, x3. That
dot product will be two times x1 plus three times x2 plus three times x3. OK, it's exactly what we want to set u1
equal to. Let's do the second one. I take the second row of A: 2,4, 5, and I do the dot product with x1, x2, x3. I will
get two times x1 plus four times x2 plus five times x3, which is u2. And, same thing with the third one: one times x1
plus one times x2 plus two times x3. So that's matrix multiplication. Let me restate things more generally. If I want
to find the entries of a product of two matrices, A and B -- I'm saying matrices, but of course they could be vectors.
Vectors are now a special case of matrices, just by taking a matrix of width one. So, if I have my matrix A, and I
have my matrix B, then I will get the product, AB. Let's say for example -- this works in any size -- let's say that A is
a 3x4 matrix. So, it has three rows, four columns. And, here, I'm not going to give you all the values because I'm
not going to compute everything. It would take the rest of the lecture. And let's say that B is maybe size 4x2. So, it
has two columns and four rows. And, let's say, for example, that we have the second column: 0,3, 0,2. So, in A
times B, the entries should be the dot products between these rows and these columns. Here, we have two
columns. Here, we have three rows. So, we should get three times two different possibilities. And so the answer
will have size 3x2. We cannot compute most of them, because I did not give you numbers, but one of them we can
compute. We can compute the value that goes here, namely, this one in the second column. So, I select the
second column of B, and I take the first row of A, and I find: 1 times 0: 0. 2 times 3: 6, plus 0, plus 8, should make
14. So, this entry right here is 14. In fact, let me tell you about another way to set it up so that you can remember
more easily what goes where. One way that you can set it up is you can put A here. You can put B up here, and
then you will get the answer here. And, if you want to find what goes in a given slot here, then you just look to its
left and you look above it, and you do the dot product between these guys. That's an easy way to remember. First
of all, it tells you what the size of the answer will be. The size will be what fits nicely in this box: it should have the
same width as B and the same height as A. And second, it tells you which dot product to compute for each
position. You just look at what's to the left, and what's above the given position. Now, there's a catch. Can we
multiply anything by anything? Well, no. I wouldn't ask the question otherwise. But anyway, to be able to do this
dot product, we need to have the same number of entries here and here. Otherwise, we can't say "take this times
that, plus this times that, and so on" if we run out of space on one of them before the other. So, the condition --
and it's important, so let me write it in red -- is that the width of A must equal the height of B. (OK, it's a bit
cluttered, but hopefully you can still see what I'm writing.) OK, now we know how to multiply matrices. So, what
does it mean to multiply matrices? Of course, we've seen in this example that we can use a matrix to tell us how to
transform from x's to u's. And, that's an example of multiplication. But now, let's see that we have two matrices like
transform from x's to u's. And, that's an example of multiplication. But now, let's see that we have two matrices like
that telling us how to transform from something to something else. What does it mean to multiply them? I claim
that the product AB represents doing first the transformation B, then transformation A. That's a slightly
counterintuitive thing, because we are used to writing things from left to right. Unfortunately, with matrices, you
multiply things from right to left. If you think about it, say you have two functions, f and g, and you write f(g(x)), it
really means you apply first g then f. It works the same way as that. OK, so why is this? Well, if I write AB times X
where X is some vector that I want to transform, it's the same as A times BX. This property is called associativity.
And, it's a good property of well-behaved products -- not of cross product, by the way. Matrix product is
associative. That means we can actually think of a product ABX and multiply them in whichever order we want. We
can start with BX or we can start with AB. So, now, BX means we apply the transformation B to X. And then,
multiplying by A means we apply the transformation A. So, we first apply B, then we apply A. That's the same as
applying AB all at once. Another thing -- a warning: AB and BA are not the same thing at all. You can probably see
that already from this interpretation. It's not the same thing to convert oranges to bananas and then to carrots, or
vice versa. Actually, even worse: this thing might not even be well defined. If the width of A equals the height of B,
we can do this product. But it's not clear that the width of B will equal the height of A, which is what we would need
for that one. So, the size condition, to be able to do the product, might not make sense -- maybe one of the
products doesn't make sense. Even if they both make sense, they are usually completely different things. The next
thing I need to tell you about is something called the identity matrix. The identity matrix is the matrix that does
nothing. What does it mean to do nothing? I don't mean the matrix is zero. The matrix zero would take X and
would always give you back zero. That's not a very interesting transformation. What I mean is the guy that takes X
and gives you X again. It's called I, and it has the property that IX equals X for all X. So, it's the transformation
from something to itself. It's the obvious transformation -- called the identity transformation. So, how do we write
that as a matrix? Well, actually there's an identity for each size because, depending on whether X has two entries
or ten entries, the matrix I needs to have a different size. For example, the identity matrix of size 3x3 has entries
one, one, one on the diagonal, and zero everywhere else. OK, let's check. If we multiply this with a vector -- start
thinking about it. What happens when multiply this with the vector X? OK, so let's say I multiply the matrix I with a
vector x1, x2, x3. What will the first entry be? It will be the dot product between ***amp***lt;1,0,0> and
***amp***lt;x1 x2 x3>. This vector is i hat. If you do the dot product with i hat, you will get the first component -- that
will be x1. One times x1 plus zero, zero. Similarly here, if I do the dot product, I get zero plus x2 plus zero. I get x2,
and here I get x3. OK, it works. Same thing if I put here a matrix: I will get back the same matrix. In general, the
identity matrix in size n x n is an n x n matrix with ones on the diagonal, and zeroes everywhere else. You just put
1 at every diagonal position and 0 elsewhere. And then, you can see that if you multiply that by a vector, you'll get
the same vector back. OK, let me give you another example of a matrix. Let's say that in the plane we look at the
transformation that does rotation by 90°, let's say, counterclockwise. I claim that this is given by the matrix: |0,1;
- 1,0|. Let's try to see why that is the case. Well, if I do R times i hat -- if I apply that to the first vector, i hat: i hat
will be ***amp***lt;1,0> so in this product, first you will get 0, and then you will get 1. You get j hat. OK, so this thing
sends i hat to j hat. What about j hat? Well, you get negative one. And then you get 0. So, that's minus i hat. So, j
is sent towards here. And, in general, if you apply it to a vector with components x,y, then you will get back -y,x,
which is the formula we've seen for rotating a vector by 90°. So, it seems to do what we want. By the way, the
columns in this matrix represent what happens to each basis vector, to the vectors i and j. This guy here is exactly
what we get when we multiply R by i. And, when we multiply R by j, we get this guy here. So, what's interesting
about this matrix? Well, we can do computations with matrices in ways that are easier than writing coordinate
change formulas. For example, if you compute R squared, so if you multiply R with itself: I'll let you do it as an
exercise, but you will find that you get |-1,0;0,-1|. So, that's minus the identity matrix. Why is that? Well, if I rotate
something by 90° and then I rotate by 90° again, then I will rotate by 180�. That means I will actually just go
to the opposite point around the origin. So, I will take (x,y) to (-x,-y). And if I applied R four times, R^4 would be
identity. OK, questions? STUDENT QUESTION: when you said R equals that matrix, is that the definition of R?
How did I come up with this R? Well, secretly, I worked pretty hard to find the entries that would tell me how to
rotate something by 90° counterclockwise. So, remember: what we saw last time or in the first lecture is that, to
rotate a vector by 90°, we should change (x, y) to (-y, x). And now I'm trying to express this transformation as a
matrix. So, maybe you can call these guys u and v, and then you write that u equals 0x-1y, and that v equals 1x
0y. So that's how I would find it. Here, I just gave it to you already made, so you didn't really see how I found it.
You will see more about rotations on the problem set. OK, next I need to tell you how to invert matrices. So, what's
the point of matrices? It's that it gives us a nice way to think about changes of variables. And, in particular, if we
know how to express U in terms of X, maybe we'd like to know how to express X in terms of U. Well, we can do
that, because we've learned how to solve linear systems like this. So in principle, we could start working,
substituting and so on, to find formulas for x1, x2, x3 as functions of u1, u2, u3. And the relation will be, again, a
linear relation. It will, again, be given by a matrix. Well, what's that matrix? It's the inverse transformation. It's the
inverse of the matrix A. So, we need to learn how to find the inverse of a matrix directly. The inverse of A, by
definition, is a matrix M, with the property that if I multiply A by M, then I get identity. And, if I multiply M by A, I also
get identity. The two properties are equivalent. That means, if I apply first the transformation A, then the
transformation M, actually I undo the transformation A, and vice versa. These two transformations are the
opposite of each other, or I should say the inverse of each other. For this to make sense, we need A to be a
square matrix. It must have size n by n. It can be any size, but it must have the same number of rows as columns.
It's a general fact that you will see more in detail in linear algebra if you take it. Let's just admit it. The matrix M will
be denoted by A inverse. Then, what is it good for? Well, for example, finding the solution to a linear system.
What's a linear system in our new language? It's: a matrix times some unknown vector, X, equals some known
vector, B. How do we solve that? We just compute: X equals A inverse B. Why does that work? How do I get from
here to here? Let's be careful. (I'm going to reuse this matrix, but I'm going to erase it nonetheless and I'll just
here to here? Let's be careful. (I'm going to reuse this matrix, but I'm going to erase it nonetheless and I'll just
rewrite it). If AX=B, then let's multiply both sides by A inverse. A inverse times AX is A inverse B. And then, A
inverse times A is identity, so I get: X equals A inverse B. That's how I solved my system of equations. So, if you
have a calculator that can invert matrices, then you can solve linear systems very quickly. Now, we should still
learn how to compute these things. Yes? [Student Questions:]"How do you know that A inverse will be on the left
of B and not after it " Well, it's exactly this derivation. So, if you are not sure, then just reproduce this calculation.
To get from here to here, what I did is I multiplied things on the left by A inverse, and then this guy simplify. If I had
put A inverse on the right, I would have AX A inverse, which might not make sense, and even if it makes sense, it
doesn't simplify. So, the basic rule is that you have to multiply by A inverse on the left so that it cancels with this A
that's on the left. STUDENT QUESTION: "And if you put it on the left on this side then it will be on the left with B as
well?" That's correct, in our usual way of dealing with matrices, where the vectors are column vectors. It's just
something to remember: if you have a square matrix times a column vector, the product that makes sense is with
the matrix on the left, and the vector on the right. The other one just doesn't work. You cannot take X times A if A
is a square matrix and X is a column vector. This product AX makes sense. The other one XA doesn't make
sense. It's not the right size. OK. What we need to do is to learn how to invert a matrix. It's a useful thing to know,
first for your general knowledge, and second because it's actually useful for things we'll see later in this class. In
particular, on the exam, you will need to know how to invert a matrix by hand. This formula is actually good for
small matrices, 3x3,4x4. It's not good at all if you have a matrix of size 1,000x1,000. So, in computer software,
actually for small matrices they do this, but for larger matrices, they use other algorithms. Let's just see how we do
it. First of all I will give you the final answer. And of course I will need to explain what the answer means. We will
have to compute something called the adjoint matrix. I will tell you how to do that. And then, we will divide by the
determinant of A. How do we get to the adjoint matrix? Let's go through the steps on a 3x3 example -- the steps
are the same no matter what the size is, but let's do 3x3. So, let's say that I'm giving you the matrix A -- let's say
it's the same as the one that I erased earlier. That was the one relating our X's and our U's. The first thing I want
to do is find something called the minors. What's a minor? It's a slightly smaller determinant. We've already seen
them without calling them that way. The matrix of minors will have again the same size. Let's say we want this
entry. Then, we just delete this row and this column, and we are left with a 2x2 determinant. So, here, we'll put the
determinant 4,5, 1,2, which is 4 times 2: 8 -- minus 5: 3. Let's do the next one. So, for this entry, I'll delete this row
and this column. I'm left with 2,5, 1,2. The determinant will be 2 times 2 minus 5, which is negative 1. Then minus
2, then I get to the second row, so I get to this entry. To find the minor here, I will delete this row and this column.
And I'm left with 3,3, 1,2. 3 times 2 minus 3 is 3. Let me just cheat and give you the others -- I think I've shown you
that I can do them. Let's just explain the last one again. The last one is 2. To find the minor here, I delete this
column and this row, and I take this determinant: 2 times 4 minus 2 times 3. So it's the same kind of manipulation
that we've seen when we've taken determinants and cross products. Step two: we go to another matrix that's
called cofactors. So, the cofactors are pretty much the same thing as the minors except the signs are slightly
different. What we do is that we flip signs according to a checkerboard diagram. You start with a plus in the upper
left corner, and you alternate pluses and minuses. The rule is: if there is a plus somewhere, then there's a minus
next to it and below it. And then, below a minus or to the right of a minus, there's a plus. So that's how it looks in
size 3x3. What do I mean by that? I don't mean, make this positive, make this negative, and so on. That's not what
I mean. What I mean is: if there's a plus, that means leave it alone -- we don't do anything to it. If there's a minus,
that means we flip the sign. So, here, we'd get: 3, then 1, -2, -3,1, 1... 3,-4, and 2. OK, that step is pretty easy. The
only hard step in terms of calculations is the first one because you have to compute all of these 2x2 determinants.
By the way, this minus sign here is actually related to the way in which, when we do a cross product, we have a
minus sign for the second entry. OK, we're almost done. The third step is to transpose. What does it mean to
transpose? It means: you read the rows of your matrix and write them as columns, or vice versa. So we switch
rows and columns. What do we get? Well, let's just read the matrix horizontally and write it vertically. We read 3,1,
- 2: 3,1, - 2. Then we read -3 3,1, 1: - 3,1, 1. Then, 3, - 4,2: 3, - 4,2. That's pretty easy. We're almost done. What
we get here is this is the adjoint matrix. So, the fourth and last step is to divide by the determinant of A. We have
to compute the determinant -- the determinant of A, not the determinant of this guy. So: 2,3, 3,2, 4,5, 1,1, 2. I'll let
you check my computation. I found that it's equal to 3. So the final answer is that A inverse is one third of the
matrix we got there: |3, - 3,3, 1,1, - 4, - 2,1, 2|. Now, remember, A told us how to find the u's in terms of the x's.
This tells us how to find x-s in terms of u-s: if you multiply x1,x2,x3 by this you get u1,u2,u3. It also tells you how to
solve a linear system: A times X equals something.